• R14.12 Consider this algorithm for sorting an array. Set k to the length of the array. Find
the maximum of the first k elements. Remove it, using the second algorithm of
Section 7.3.6. Decrement k and place the removed element into the kth position.
Stop if k is 1. What is the algorithm’s running time in big-Oh notation? 

a = [1,3,5,8,2]
k = a.length, i.e. 5
maxIndex = set max = a[1] and compare to other elements by incrementing index from 1, so 2nd element onwards, O(n)
maxElement = a[maxIndex]
remove maxIndex element => shift back one space all elements from maxIndex + 1 ownwards (considering order doesn't matter for the unsorted part of the array, we could have swapped swap the max element with the last element without having to shift every element backwards, but we are trying to compute the running time for the algo that does shift each element backwards maintaining the order of the unsorted part of the array)
k = k - 1, i.e. length of array minus the max element
a[k] = maxElement, i.e. moving the removed max element to the end of the array

This algo sorts an array in ascending order.

My feeling is that the algorithms running time is O(n**2).

- For each index in the array, from 0 to k, with k starting at a.length, i.e. n, we access the element at that index, compare it for greater size to max, optionally reassign maxElement's value. We acess each element in the array once, so this part of the algorithm is O(n). This finds the largest element in the array. 
- Then the max element is first removed, so that's 1 operation, and then all elements are shifted back one space by assigning index a value of maxElement's index, and assigning element at the index the value of the following element, a[i] = a[i + 1], from maxElement's index to the penultimate element's index, i.e. k - 2 (k starts as the size of the array, so a.length, and is the unsorted head length). That's k-2 - maxElementIndex operations, which is k-2, or n-2 operations in the worst case scenario where the maxElementIndex == 0, so this array element backshift algorithm is an O(n) operation growth rate algorithm relative to number of elements. Because the operations are 1 + (k - 2 - maxElementIndex) which has k as it's largest term. so O(k), or O(n).
- Then the length of the unsorted head is decremented, k = k - 1, O(1).
- Then the max element is assigned to the last index in the array a[k] = maxElement, O(1).

Now, the question is, does the second O(n) part of the algorithm take place as part of each operation in the first O(n) algorithm, or does it happen afterwards?
Because if an O(n) algorithm happens for each iteration in the first O(n) algorithms, that's n * n operations, so the two algorithms together are an O(n**2) algorithm, but if the algorithms happen one after the other then the operations growth rate of the algorithm is also O(n).

The algorithms take place one after the other. First we find the largest element in the unsorted part of the array. And then we shift the elements in the array backwards. So that's an O(n) algo followed by an O(n) algo, which means the _father_ algo is also O(n).

However, this O(n) algorithm, which moves the largest element in an array to the end is repeated n times when sorting all n elements in the array, so overall this algorithm is O(n**2) number of operations relative to number of elements.
