## •• R14.34 

Suppose we modify the quicksort algorithm from Special Topic 14.3, selecting the
middle element instead of the first one as pivot. Find a sequence of values for which
this algorithm has an O(n**2) running time.

### answer

quicksort with middle value used as pivot instead of the first value

runthrough

[4,0,3,2,1]

// 1st iter
pivot = 3
// partitioning array into 2 subarrays based on comparisons of values with pivot value
[1,0,2,|3,4]

// 2nd iter
pivot = 0
[0,|1,2]

// 3rd iter
pivot = 0
[0]

// 4th iter
pivot = 1
[1,2]

// back to first iteration
// snapshot of the array now
[0,1,2,|3,4]

// 5th iter
pivot = 3
[3,4]

// back to first iteration, both partitions are now sorted too
[0,1,2,3,4]

I know from the book that quicksort is slowest when using the first element of the array as the pivot if the array is already sorted. 
And I understand why now after debugging the quicksort implementation example, and reading an article explaining quicksort, and watching 2 video visualising a quicksort, especially helpful was the hackerrank video on youtube. I've noticed that online some variations of the quicksort algorithm use a slightly different algorithm which creates two partitions, one with smaller and one with larger items (equal vals can be in either), and doesn't place the pivot item in the subarrays, and then after recursively sorting the subarrays with quicksort concatenates the first sorted subarray with the pivot value, and then with the second subarary, in the format: firstSubarray + pivot + secondSubarray. Whereas the quicksort implementation creates two subarrays every iteration, one of which contains the pivot value not necessarily in the first position, and one which does not.

In my walkthrough I walkedthrough the quicksort algorithm as described in the book.

Anywho, back to answering the question, when we use the middle value of the array to be sorted as the pivot, in what circumstances does the sorting algorithm have O(n**2) efficiency?
It will be in cases where one of the partitions contains just the pivot value, and the other partition contains all the other values, just like the scenario when using the first item as the pivot leads to an O(n**2) num of ops relative to the number of items.
The efficiency of the quicksort algorithm depends on the sizes of the subarrays that are formed after partition. For each iteration the pivot value is compared to every other value in the part of the array being sorted. So, if after the partition, one partition contains just the pivot value, and the other all the other values, i.e. the pivot was the largest or smallest value and therefore the first value in the array being sorted in descending or ascending order, then it follows that for the next recursive step of calling the quicksort algorithm on the paritions subarrays, one partition will be compared to n - 1 items, the 1 being the pivot value in the other partition.

So, if I want the quicksort algorithm which uses a single pivot choosen in the middle of the array to have O(n**2) number of operations relative to input size I need the middle value of the original array and the middle value of the resulting subarrays to always be the next value in the sorted array, so the largest or the smallest value depending on if I'm ordering in descending or ascending order.

For example:
[1,2,3,4,5] would be O(n**2) efficiency to sort with quicksort when sorting in ascending order and using the first item as the pivot every iteration of the quicksort algorithm.
But if using the middle value of the array as the pivot, to make the same sequence of elements have O(n**2) efficiency I need to make the first value of the sorted array be the middle value of the array, and the 2nd value of the sorted array be the middle value of the array that will remain after the 1st value is removed, and so on, like so: [4,3,1,2,5].
So now after the first iteration's partition, the partitions are [1,|4,3,2,5], so for the second partition the pivot is the item at index (length(4) / 2) = 2, which means that every single value in the rest of the partition will need to be compared to 2, so 3 comparisons to obtain the next partition of 2,4,3,5 into [2] and [4,3,5] like so: [1,|[2,|4,3,5]], and then [1,|[2,|[3,|4,5]]], and then [1,|[2,|[3,|[4,|[5]]]]].
That's 4, then 3, then 2, then 1 comparisons, and an extra 5 for the first iteration if there was 1 extra element in a position which meant that partitions resulted in 1 very large partition and 1 single pivot element partition. Which is a total number of comparisons == (n-1) + (n-2) + (n-3) + (n-4), or in general (n-1) + (n-2) + ... + (1) comparisons to sort an array using quicksort in the worse case scenario where the pivot is the next value in the sorted array. If we remove the constant values we end up with T = n + n + n + n for a total of (n-2) * n times, or n * n comarisons, hence O(n**2) for quicksort in a worse case scenario where the pivot value chosen is the next value in the sorted sequence of values.


