•• R14.21 Consider the following algorithm to remove all duplicates from an array: Sort the
array. For each element in the array, look at its next neighbor to decide whether it
is present more than once. If so, remove it. Is this a faster algorithm than the one in
Exercise •• R14.19?

•• R14.19 Your task is to remove all duplicates from an array. For example, if the array has the
values
4  7  11  4  9  5  11  7  3  5
then the array should be changed to
4  7  11  9  5  3
Here is a simple algorithm: Look at a[i]. Count how many times it occurs in a. If the
count is larger than 1, remove it. What is the growth rate of the time required for this
algorithm?


The algoirthm for removing duplicates in ex19 accesses visits every item in the array once for each item in the array, resulting in O(n**2) efficiency.

The algorithm in ex21 removes duplicate items by sorting the array, for example using merge sort with O(n log(n)) efficiency, and then visits each item and the following item to see if the current item is a duplicate, O(n * 2) so O(n), and for each duplicate removes it by shifting the array left from that item onwards which involves visiting the remaining elements and their successor (n - i) * 2, O((n - i)*2), which becomes O(n). if an array is full of loads of duplicates, i.e. all the same elements, then each element needs to re removed so in that worse case scenario this algorithm does an O(n) operation for each element O(n), so that's O(n * n), or O(n**2), but if there are no duplicates then the algo doesn't do any shifting and so duplicate detection is an O(n) operation.
Which means overall the efficiency of the algo from ex21 is also O(n**2) because that's the largest term.
So the duplciate removal algo from ex21 is 

e.g. algo from ex21:

0, 0, 0, 1, 2, 3
0, 0, 1, 2, 3
0, 1, 2, 3

for (i = 0, i < length - 2, i++)
    if a[i + 1] == a[i]
        for (j = i, j < length - 1, j++)
            a[j] = a[j+1]
            usedCapacity = usedCapacity - 1
