•• R15.2 Consider a program that manages an appointment calendar. Should it place the
appointments into a list, stack, queue, or priority queue? Explain your answer.

A program that manages an appointment calendar needs to store a collection of appointments.
An appointment will have a time at which it begins and ends.
And appointments will want to be ordered based on start or end times when displayes in the calendar.
Users may want to look up appointments by name or visualise appointments by time and date on a calendar.

So we need to chose a collection implementation that lets us store and access appointment objects in an order based on their start or end time, we want to be able to efficiently look up appointments in our calendar by their time range of by their name (that could benefit from a different collection implementation which stores appointments in an efficient lookup order, e.g. one that allows binary searching the items based on their attendees name or the appointment name).
And we want to be able to add and remove new appointments efficiently, or move appointments within the collection, for example if they change time.

Collections that let us store elements according to an ordering are lists, of which stacks are a subclass, and queues, of which priority queues are a subclass.

We also want to be able to efficiently look up elements by appointment name or an attendee names. Lookup tasks are suited to a map, seeing as maps allow for efficient item lookup by a key value associate with them, such as an attendee name or the appointment name. So one option would be store appointments in a maps for lookup purposes, and in another collection that allows ordering for display purposes.
If storing items in a single collection, lists and queues allow iterating over elements, however only lists allow moving elements position once they have been added to the collection, for example when sorting appointments by chronological order. The order of elements in a queue on the other hand will be the order of insertion, or arbitrary in the case of a priority queue.

Queues and lists allow for ordering of elements. A priority queue could keep elements in the order of priority, where the lower priority items could be the ones with earlier start times.

We also need to be able to add and remove appointments to the collection of appointments, and move appointments within the collection, for example if their start time and/or date changes. Appointments can be added before or after all appointments, but also in the middle of pre-existing appointments. We want this operation to be efficient. This disqualifies stacks and queues from our collection implementation options, because stacks do not allow element insertion and removal in every position, but only at the top, i.e. right sidee, of the collection. This disqualifies a queue collection implementation aswell, because with a queue you can only add elements to one end (the left side) of a collection, and can only remove elements from the other end (the right side) of the same collection.
This leaves us with two options of those considered: a list or a priority queue. 
In a list we can add and remove elements at different positions, and also move elements within the collection, however adding elements to the middle of the queue is inefficient because it requires moving all elements after the added element in an arraylist implementation, or iterating over all previous or following elements in the linkedlist in a linked list implementation.
In a priority queue we cannot add elements at any position because the items are not ordered by position which means that items in a priority queue are not ordered when iterated over, and when it comes to removal of items, a priority queue only allows for the removal of elements in order of priority. These addition and removal operations are efficient, which enables efficient retrieval of the next highest priority element. But doesn't allow efficient removal of appointments which are not the highest priority. And moving an appointment time would an inefficient lookup operation to delete the old appointment item followed by an addition operation.

So in conclusion a program that manages an appointment calendar which stores a group of items for later retrieval, and allows for efficient adding, removing, and moving of appointments should use a list implementation for its collection of appointments, because lists allow items to be added at middle positions in the sorted collection of appointments, unlike stacks and queues which only allows adding and removing items from one or both ends of the collection. However, moving appiontments in a sorted list will require resorting to maintain appointments sorted by time. 
And while priority queues allow adding items with any priority to the collection while maintaining the collection sorted by the priority measure, such as the start time, priority queues do not allow for iterating over appointment items in order of priority, e.g. in order of start time, which would make displaying appointments in order of start time difficult, and more inefficient, because you would iterate over elements in random order and then have to sort them when displaying them. However, I could always copy a priority queue and remove elements in order to display them in order. 
If the application only needs to alert or display the next earliest appointment however, a priority queue is appropriate because more efficient at accessing said element. However removing an arbitrtary appointment remains inefficient. So I think a list remains the best option.
